So you'd had enough of the military and you didn't
want to go back into a military setting. Yeah,
you've got to go into it wholeheartedly again or
stay out of it. So I decided that Texas A&M wasn't
for me. My mission at that time was to get a college
degree to satisfy my family. and then go do what I
damn well pleased. Well, why did you go on
eventually then to get a PhD? During that process,
did you get interested in education? No,
I taught a year. I made exceptionally good grades
in Baylor because I always had to make good grades
to carry that extra load. And so I reached the point
along about 19, 22, where I could finish in one
summer school at Baylor. While I was in summer
school finishing the,
to get the diploma ahead of the game, a
teacher, a superintendent from little town up
close to Corsicana. Came down and was begging a
fellow that had taught school under him
previously to come back up there and be principal
of his high school for another year or two at Lemon
Grove. This guy says, I can't accept the job. He
says, I'm offered a college job up at Benton in the
math department as an instructor. If I can get my
foot on the ladder with a college, I should do that
rather than messing around with high schools
anymore. And he says, so he said, well, have you a
friend down here that could do the job? He says,
yeah, there he is, walking across the campus.
Well, that happened to be me. And he says, you can do
any damn thing he wants to. And if you can persuade
him to take this job, he says, I'll call him over
here. Well, on that recommendation, he offered me
a job up there. Of course, we had quite a
conversation about it. He paid a good salary for
nine months. I had just turned down a job on a
newspaper that offered me $25 a week for the first
six weeks. And if at the end of the six weeks I was
still making good, they'd raise my salary to $30 a
week. And by God, from there on I was on my own. That
was the journalistic world. Well, in competition
with $160 a month for nine months, only nine
months, at Blooming Grove under this very fine
fellow
that was really hard up for, what he was trying to do
was to get another man or two on the faculty besides
himself. See, man. I went up there and I finished
that job and
went back down to Baylor and the old dean that, I
can't think of his name at the moment,
says, how did you get along teaching school up
there? I said, well, I enjoyed teaching school. I
says, they had me doing every damn thing under the
sun.
If they organized, they didn't have enough boys to
really organize a football team, but they did
scrape together about 15 that
got suits up for them, and I says, I wound up
coaching the team. I says, I didn't know how to
throw a football. I says, everything that
happened. And furthermore, the churches had
apparently decided that they had, each one of
them, the Baptist church was entitled to half the
faculty, and the Methodist church was entitled to
the other half. Well, I didn't fit into either
half. So I wasn't gonna take on any, Each one of
them, yeah, sure, we need somebody to teach this,
teach that. Everything, every extracurricular
piece of work that came up, I had to do it. I told him,
I says, I enjoy teaching, but I says, I was
reelected. But he said, if I can get a college job
where I, responsible only for teaching and
papers. I says, I think that'd be pretty good, but
if you haven't got anything like that, or if the
placement bureau here can't offer me something
better than that, then I'm quitting the teaching
profession. And
he said, well, you shouldn't do that. He gave me
quite a song and dance. flattered me about my
record for A's and honor points and all that stuff.
And said, you, the teaching, you ought to stay in
it. And so I said, well, you can tell that to the
placement bureau here. Something comes along.
let me know.
This was actually at the, I'd already told them
that I wasn't coming back to Blooming Grove, but I
was still, I went back to work up there. And before I
finished the job,
I got an offer from
Gulf Coast Military Academy. and to teach
just about whatever I could teach that they might
want you to teach.
So, I took a shot at that and got down there and in a
way it was worse than blooming a grove because
There, I
became what they called a tactical officer in
addition to my other duties. My other duties were a
full-time teaching schedule in the forenoon. I
was off the rest of the afternoon until drill time,
and at drill time, I was out there on the drill
field, keeping an eye on my particular company,
which was the cadets in Company B. So here I was back
in the military school without knowing it. They
did pay well. They treated me handsomely. There
was also night duty. I was billeted at one end of the
dormitory that contained a battery of Company B.
And the commandant of cadets there says, how is it
that you're not in uniform? I said, hell, I'm not
supposed to wear a uniform here. I'm a civilian. He
says, to hell you are. I says, you're a tactical
officer. I says, I wasn't hired as a tactical
officer. Well, anyway, you're here and you're
functioning. He says, I heard you dress down the
company before going on parade, and you was in
civilian clothes. He says, we can't have that. I
says, what are you going to do about it? He says,
well, we're going to commission you a second
lieutenant of the reserve. Oh, I was going to ask
you that, how you got in the reserves, and this is
how. I'm going to give you a, Get your commission,
second lieutenant of the reserve corps. I says,
well,
I said, I'm not taking any examination or
anything. He says, you don't have to have any. I'll
have my master sergeant
picks up the papers. He'll bring them over. You
sign your name. He says, pretty soon you'll be a
second lieutenant of the reserve corps. I said,
well, there's a hell of a lot of drill that I have
forgotten and the drills in the Navy, even in
parades, is different from the Army. I said, if I'm
going to be able to service, I'd rather have the
Navy end of it. Well, no, we don't have any Navy
courses or naval officers here. I said, well, We
had a discussion over it, but I wound up accepting
the commission and put on the uniform with the rest
of them. Now, did you have to go to meetings? Go to
meetings? Go to meetings of other second
lieutenants? No. Did they send you to any kind of a
reserve training program? Hell no. And was that
easy to get into the reserves in the 1920s? Well, if
you've got the endorsement of a... professor of
military science and tactics. I told him, I says, I
don't know a damn thing about, I says, I know the
commands for breaking from just what I know from
the learned here or have or am learning. I had
learned from reading the manual of arms infantry
drill regulations, I knew how to give the commands
to go from a column of squads to a skirmish line. The
command is skirmishers blah blah blah blah. And I
knew, all I knew was what I had learned there as a
tactical officer. During the 1920s and the 1930s,
when America was at peace, you remained the whole
time in the Army Reserve. Is that not right? Well,
let's see. You were still a reserve commissioned
officer.
Let me get the book, and I'll give you the exact
date. Okay, let's continue. I entered
the U.S. Navy January 18,
I entered the U.S. Navy
as a seaman,
January 18, 19.
or January 18, 1918, it would have to be.
U.S. then, 18 January, and I was discharged
18th of July, 1919.
That would be about 20 some odd months, just short
of two years. Then I became a private of field
artillery, 7th of January, 1930. I became
a private field artillery, 7th of January, 1930.
And I served in that grade to...
I became a private the 7th of January, and I vacated
that status the 20th.
that the 30th
of January to the 10th of January 1930. Now the
reason for that is a
man to be promoted in the National Guard had to be in
the National Guard at the time he was promoted. So I
had graciously accepted the job as captain of the
field artillery battery in River Falls,
Wisconsin on that second date. Now you say, well,
what kind of, how did you bridge the gap between
that? Well, I went from, I
went from, uh,
the Military Academy at Gulfport, Mississippi. I
accepted a job in the New Mexico School of Mines
purely for the simple reason that it was a
degree-granting institution. I asked no further
questions. Actually, my remuneration in terms of
room and board, laundry and food and everything,
But my remuneration at Gulf Coast Military
Academy was more than the $2,000 a year that was
offered me as an instructor or assistant
professor at New Mexico School of Mines. But I had
told the teacher's agency in Chicago that got the
job for me, that
not to bother me until there was a job open in a
college or a university. And so this one was the
first that they found for me and made a sale on me,
sight unseen. And so I'd accepted it. Now I got out
to New Mexico School of Mines and I was there about
three months when they were organizing,
reorganizing and expanding the National Guard of
New Mexico. Well the president of the School of
Mines was a nice fellow and he was naturally wanted
if there were any vacancies or anybody any sugar
gonna fall out of this organizing this
engineering company at Socorro.
Why he wanted it to be open to any of the boys at the
School of Mines. In fact, he wanted somebody on the
faculty to kind of front and center and get an oar in
that deal.
So, I was not an engineer,
but And I hadn't been to any camp or anything as a
reserve officer, but I was still tagged with the
state and lieutenant's title. So, well,
I saw that none of the other guys were going to front
and center and say they'd do it, and I had a
disgracefully easy job out there. My teaching
load
wasn't... really, really respectable
amount of service for the salary I was getting.
Although it was, seems to be now, actually in those
days two thousand dollars as a guy with had no more
than an A.B. degree
and one year, two years of teaching experience
$2,000 a year was a hell of a good salary. What was
the teaching load? Practically nothing. I had...
I was assistant professor of English and
economics. And
everything else needed a slide rule. although
sometimes you use the slide rule in economics.
Everybody else on the faculty went around with
these slide rules sticking out of their pocket. I
was the only guy on the faculty that didn't have a
slide rule. My courses were three
hours a week for a freshman a section of freshmen
and sophomores.
It was three hours a week of teaching
really freshman English. And bear in mind, some of
the students in those colleges were people, were
men 36 years old that had become a mine boss or a mine
captain and they knew and knew the game and could
run the mine better than the
mining school graduate that was superintendent
of the mine. Whereas the superintendent of the
mine was getting at least eight or to nine thousand
a year and this guy was getting what you would
consider more or less straw boss a wage and those
guys are the kind of guys that say well i'm going to
the mining school get a degree and qualify for
something better so in that in the class that i had
of about of 15 students in each section.
I had three hours a week with two sections. In other
words, six hours at the podium. And students in
front of me, some of them shade younger than I am,
most of them, vastly older than I in both
education, mining education and experience. But
my job was to teach them the rudiments of grammar.
That's where I learned that I had to start there.
You can't teach English without the terminology.
So you've got to teach them the terminology of what
you're talking about. And you also at this time
became involved with the National Guard in New
Mexico. Yeah. And you were given, you were made a
captain. Well, no. No, I didn't get past second
lieutenant. Okay, so you were a second
lieutenant. I'm a second lieutenant and I didn't
stay with them long enough to go to the summer
training camp. I went out and helped to organize
the company. They had two platoons. One was a
platoon of Mexicans where they called the role in
Spanish. The other platoon were students and
hired our clerks and whatnot around over town.
They thought it might be a two weeks vacation in the
summer.
So I organized the downtown and the students. I got
quite a few students into it.
So there was one platoon that spoke English, the
other platoon that spoke Spanish. Their role was
called Spanish All of the ranks and ratings of the
engineer company, of course, went to the white
engineering students and men around town that
were engineers or knew something about mining.
Well, one of them was a bank clerk, and the other one
of the telephone company. The captain of the
company was the manager of the telephone company.
Then they had a bonafide engineer graduate from
the Virginia Military Institute, he was the first
lieutenant. And my qualifications as second
lieutenant of engineers was that when the, and by
the way the first sergeant was a Mexican. and a darn
bright one and a darn good one. But my principal
duty was that I knew enough Spanish to know when he
was calling the roll correctly.
That was the warning I had from the captain. Your
job is to keep your eyes and ears open on this. So you
never went out on maneuvers with him? Hell no. I
went to I got a leave of absence to miss the
maneuvers, and I've forgotten where the
maneuvers were. I think it was up around the camp at
Las Vegas, New Mexico, not to be confused with not
to be confused with Las Vegas, Nebraska, Nevada.
And so you went, you got a leave of absence to go to
the University of Colorado to get a master's.
That's right, so I did a master's. I worked that
summer and
I kind of knocked a home run with the head of the
history department up there. No, he wasn't headed
in. He headed in a long time afterward. A fella
named Goody Koontz. Old Goody Koontz was one of my
history profs at the graduate level. And so,
Goody Koontz was kind of concentrating on trying
to get a grip on what you'd call mining history in
the West. He was a Western. He was a disciple of the
Ternarian theory of
frontier history and he was out trying to learn all
he could about mining districts. as a social
aspect of the mining frontier, or civilizing
influence, or uncivilizing, nobody knew which.
And Goody Coons was trying to nail down a few things
on that. And at the end of, I wrote a pretty good
paper for him, I've forgotten what it was, and I
could write fast and didn't mind writing. I typed
pretty well and so I did a pretty good paper for him.
He asked me to stay and he said, you're teaching in
the mining school, aren't you? Had I looked into
the nature of the mining districts in New Mexico,
What was the legal and social, legal excuse for
them? Were they governmental units of record? By
what authority did they lynch people, if they
lynched any? And it's a social aspect of the
frontier and so forth. You looked into that? No, I
didn't know anything about it.
He said, well, you've read my
study on the subject of the mining districts of
Gilpin County, Colorado, haven't you? I said,
well, actually, I should have read the writings of
one of my professors, but I missed you.
I hadn't read it. He said, well, you've been a bit
deaf. and he says, when are you gonna come back to
finish your master's degree? I says, I'm coming
back next summer to work on it. He says, well, I'll
tell you.
He says, if you get interested in it when you get
back, see what you can do with the mining districts
of some area, logical area, of New Mexico. I said,
well I've rattled around down there enough to know
where the logical district is. I said the logical
district is a southeast corner, the southeast
quarter of the state. I says there isn't much up
toward Colorado because Colorado was already
being mined from the north, the big strikes up in
Well, Gilpin County is one of them. I says, the
mining history of New Mexico practically ends
with what's being done now and what was done. I
said, he says, well, he says, you're ready to get
started already. He says, you do me a good master's
thesis a good master's thesis.
Doesn't have to be worthy of publication as is, but
he says something that you can authenticate. Says
if you can pull something together, he says you can
get enough credits on a high quality MA thesis.
that you won't need but one more summer to get the,
complete the master's. But you'll have to come
back here and complete the master's, whatever is
left, and take the master's final examination,
which is a poor imitation of the Ph.D. examination
and so forth. And yes, you have to have one to get the
master's from our college, now you have to have a
reading knowledge of one foreign language. Says,
I take it that you know enough Spanish for that. I
says, yeah, I know Spanish as well as I do English
when it comes to grammar and reading it. I can't,
I'm not as articulate as I ought to be in oral
Spanish, but yeah, I can handle anything that's in
writing down there. So you did this master's
thesis then? in my spare time at the college, of
which I was overloaded with. I had more spare time
than I had teaching. Well, why did you decide to go
on for a PhD then? Well, I did after a fashion go on
for a PhD, but not from there. I didn't want a PhD
from Colorado. It was
I
formed a queer idea about PhDs in those days.
If a guy got a PhD highway, if a guy got an AB Missouri
PhD, Missouri, M.A. Missouri, Ph.D. Missouri.
Well, I just figured the guy didn't really have a
Ph.D. He just dug in enough with one or two
departments to get one, and they didn't have any
horizon. Now, I got that theory largely from this
fellow Goody Coons. He told me, he says, with a
master's says, hell that's pretty good for high
school work, and gets you a job anywhere in a good
high school, and lower jobs than the level of
scholarship in universities. He says if you're
going to be a school teacher, you've got to be a
university school teacher. and you've got to get
the requirements, meet the requirements. He
says, I'm sure that you can do a thesis on what we're
talking about, and it would get by as a PhD thesis in
some places. But he says...
I recommend that you get your PhD from, get all your
graduate degrees from a different university.
Why'd you decide on Minnesota? Well, I
transferred there from Chicago for a
geographical reason.
I was in Chicago and I had retired One of my language
requirements, I had mastered reading French
exceptionally well. I was already pretty
well-oiled in Spanish, and so I boned up reading.
Of course, you don't have to be an expert reader,
except in your field. Now, the vocabulary that you
run into in reading one of Mary May's novelettes,
or something by,
by any of the French authors, real big names, de
Maupassant, there's so much vernacular in there
that,
You have to be pretty good on reading French to read
it in French, but when you get to history, the
vernacular that you come into, break into in
history, hell you can read, you can read French
without knowing a hell of a lot of French. Because
so many of their political terms and their
military terms and their newspaper terms are
right there in front of you. I had no trouble with
French. However, today, if those two
requirements were still required in a PhD today,
we'd have better PhDs than we're getting. The
modern PhDs are getting away with murder compared
to what they would have had to do back in the 30s and
early 40s. I know that sounds like a braggadocio
statement, but I've seen PhD theses today that I
wouldn't give a goddamn thing higher than a C+.
You just go down to the Ph.D. files of some of these
colleges that are offering them, and most of the
O-line colleges like,
well, University of Wisconsin, they'll admit to
you without blushing that they're not requiring
the PhDs that they did before the war years or even
shortly after the war. Says the competition, the
demand for PhDs to hold university teaching jobs
in these universities created the demand. Well,
unfortunately, the people that are suffering
from the demand also have the powers to meet the
problem by easing up on the production and then
producing more and more. So that's the reason, if
you really want to cry over the deterioration, of
these famous departments for this and that field,
says if you want to shed any tears over that, that's
where you shed them, is when enrollments jump from
10,000 to 45,000.
It's inevitable that the professors will begin
saying who among my mediocre crop of teaching
assistants, and of course teaching assistants
has itself watered down the quality of the
academicians, academics.
So we had to produce more PhDs to meet our growing
needs, and if a man stays on the in a job as a PhD, as a
graduate student in Wisconsin, if he stays there
seven years as a teaching assistant, I think the
word now is TAs, as a TA in Wisconsin, if he stays
there seven years, hell, he has tenure. under the
law. So the profs down there, I know the problem
they were up against. I saw them in action
while I was chief of staff for this, these
technicians for these three combined boards. And
they weren't talking about who
is best qualified to be the next PhD to be Captain
Gound, but how can we get good teaching assistants
and then pick the best of the teaching assistants?
Well, when you begin basing your need upon the
teaching skill and subordinating the academic
skill, you see, that is a very dangerous switch in
the ultimate objective of what the Ph.D. used to
be. How'd you get an offer to be a college president
while you were still in your thirties? Well,
because I was offered a job at the University of
Minnesota, to make a long story short.
I thought to hell. At
River Falls, You offered a job at the University of
Minnesota? Yeah, I was a full professor. When you
got your PhD there? Yeah. And instead you decided
to become the president of the University of
Wisconsin at Superior? Yeah, which may or may not
have been a good decision.
You were a young man at that time, 34 years old or so.
That's right. As a college president. Yeah. I was
the youngest in the state and they were shouting
about young university and college presidents.
They just brought in this
dreamer that was from the law school at Yale. What
was his name? He was there president of the
University of Chicago.
He's been out in Southern California living out
there, retired.
I haven't seen or heard much of him lately. I know
there was a very young man that came out of Oxford
that was president of the University of Rochester
about that time. There was a wave on saying we've
got to go out and get younger blood. Well the
Rochester guy lasted about two years and
vanished, but the guy that came to University of
Chicago stayed there a long time.
And you stayed You stayed there at Superior until
1940. Yeah. When you were October
of 1940, you were activated.
You were granted a leave of absence for military
active duty on October 15, 1940. That's about
right. And you went into the Army at what rank? Now,
were you captain then? No, I was colonel. Oh, they
gave you, they made you a colonel. Well, hell, I had
worked hard enough to get it. Were you a full
colonel or a lieutenant colonel? Oh, I was a full
colonel. Even though you did not participate,
this whole time you did not participate, during
the 30's then you didn't participate in Any
military drills or summer drills? To hell I
didn't. Oh, well tell me about that then. Well,
I was promoted from a private in the battery at
River Falls. I was promoted from private to
captain for the simple reason that the captain was
a lawyer, and a bright, sharp lawyer named Kenneth
White. Well, Kenneth White